so let's continue with our discussion of
the derivative
let me recall that
the derivative of a function if it
exists
which we denote by f prime of c this is
the
limit as x goes to c of f of x minus f
of c
over x minus
c okay
last time
we
looked at the relationship between
continuity
and differentiability
and showed that differentiability
implies continuity
but that having a derivative is quite a
miraculous
thing
because there are continuous functions
which we actually constructed
we constructed a continuous function you
can generalize that example
so we constructed a continuous function
that has
that is differentiable nowhere so
in fact
you know differentiability is a much
stronger
condition than continuity and it's it's
something of a miracle
you know just as a side note if you go
on to study complex analysis
which are functions of a complex
variable rather than a real variable you
also have the notion of a derivative
there
and
then the derivative is much more
miraculous um
uh than it is here in in the setting of
r
but the whole point is the derivative is
something of a miracle
so today the goal is to
prove some properties about the
derivatives you know
most of these you know
maybe you didn't cover the proofs of
them in calculus
with the ultimate goal of proving
the mean value theorem which is
to me kind of
you know
probably
the most underappreciated but most
important um
result in calculus
now you
could argue that probably the hero of
the story of calculus is the fundamental
theorem of calculus which connects
integration which will cover next after
differentiation
which so the fundamental theorem of
calculus connects integration and
differentiation
so that really is but
and that is really the hero of calculus
gets used more
than
anything else
but
to prove that
you use the mean value theorem
so you know
if the fundamental theorem of calculus
was batman
i would say the mean value theorem is
something like alfred
you know he's he's really the reason why
batman gets to be who he is
um
all right enough analogies for now let's
go back to proving some
properties of the derivative
so
first let's do
some basic
the basic linearity and
rules for the derivative so
let f
go from i to r i is always some interval
um
then
if f
so i have two functions f and g from i
to r c is a point in i
and
and the conclusion is if f
g are
differentiable at
c
then
we have several
rules that we can apply the first is
basically the linearity
of the derivative that
for all alpha
and r
function alpha f
plus g which now goes from
i to r
[Applause]
is differentiable at c
and
the derivative of the function alpha f
plus g
prime
c
is
alpha times f prime of c plus g prime of
c
i think okay starting right a little
slanted here
second is the
multiplication rule
which is the function f times g
is differentiable
at c and
the derivative of the product is not the
product of the derivatives but
prime of c g of c
plus
f of c g prime of c
so that's a
multiplication rule and then we also
also have the quotient rule
and
you know just like when you need to
divide by something you need to assume
that you're never dividing by zero
um
if
g of x does not equal 0.
for all x and i
then the function
f over g
is differentiable
at c
and the derivative
is the derivative of the top
times the bottom minus
the top times the derivative of the
bottom
over the bottom square
not prime g of c square
okay
um so i'll prove one and two uh three
we'll leave as an exercise
um
all right so uh for one we just compute
that
the limit as
x goes to c of alpha f plus g
of x minus alpha f
plus g
of c
over x minus c
this is just by definition
alpha times f of x plus g of x minus
alpha times f of c plus g of c and so
this equals the limit
as x goes to c and just uh collecting
terms
alpha times
f of x minus f of c
times x minus
c plus
g of x minus g of c
over x minus c
and
uh
all of these limits exist so this is
just a fixed number the limit as x goes
to c of this
exists and this exists so by what we
know about limits
um
namely that the
limit of the sum is the sum of the
limits and then scalars just pull out of
the limit this is equal to
alpha times f prime of c
plus g prime of c
okay
so that's the proof of the first one
for the proof of the second one
we'll use the fact that uh
a function which is con
differentiable at a point is also
continuous at a point
um
so
since g
is differentiable let's see
it is
continuous at c
ie
limit as x goes to c
of g of x
equals g of c
now we compute the limit as x goes to c
of
f times g of x minus f of c
times g of c
over x minus c
now what i'm going to do is add and
subtract
f of c times g of x
so this i can write as the limit as x
goes to c
of f of x
minus f of c
over x minus c times
g of x
plus
um
now
f of c
times g of x minus g of c
over x minus c
and
again so this limit as x goes to c
exists this is just the derivative of f
at c
and we noted that since g is
differentiable at c g is also continuous
at c meaning the limit as x goes to c of
g of x equals g of c
this is just a constant f c this goes to
g prime of c so
all these limits exist and therefore we
get that this is equal to f prime of c
times g of c
plus
f of c
g prime of c and three i'll leave as an
exercise
okay
again you know you'll you'll write out
um
you'll add and subtract something uh to
f of x over g of x minus f of c over g
of c and use the fact that we have
continuity that differentiability at a
point implies continuity and just
evaluate the limit so i'm going to stop
with these two rules
i don't know why i called it the
multiplication rule it's called the
product rule
well
multiplication and product the same
thing
um
but we also have the chain rule which
requires
a little more care to prove
um than of what we've done so far for
these rules
so
suppose i have two intervals
and then i have a function g going from
i 1 to i 2
f going from i 2
to r
and suppose
g is
differentiable at c
and f
is
differentiable at gfc
then the function
f of g
which now goes from i 1 to r
this is differentiable
at c
and the derivative
equals
f prime of g of c
times
g prime of c
okay
okay so
[Applause]
um
so what's the the
basic uh
you know
what's kind of the basic idea
again so this is basic
idea is that
we write
the difference quotient
g of x minus f of
g of c over x minus c
as
f of g of x
minus
g
f at
g of c
times over g of x minus g of c
times
um
g of x
over g of c times x minus c
and
um you know let x go to z c and then
we'll pick up the derivative of g here
at c and right here
uh this is f of something converging to
g of c
and so this should be like f prime of g
is c but the only problem with
really writing this down is that there
could be points where
g of x equals g of c and then i'm
dividing by zero that's not allowed okay
so
writing this expression is meaningless
okay
but we're gonna do something like this
in spirit
okay where at least when g of x does not
equal g of c
this thing kind of equals this thing
okay
that's uh um
that's kind of the the basic idea
okay
so to implement the strategy
[Applause]
um let's introduce uh
some notation and a few auxiliary
functions so first off
the function we're interested in
taking the derivative f of g let me call
that h of x because i don't have to keep
writing uh
f of g of x
let's call d this will be the point g of
c
so
we want to show
then that
h prime of c
exists and it's equal to
f prime of d times g prime of c
yeah
just in this notation i've set up
okay so now let me
define some auxiliary functions u of y
this is going to be essentially the
difference quotient
of
f
except at
a certain point so this is f of y
minus f of d
over y minus d
when
y does not equal d so that this is
meaningful
and then f prime of d
when y
equals d
and then v of x
so this is going to be this is going to
kind of play the role of you know that
first expression i wrote up there f of g
of x minus f of g of c
okay
um and then v of x this will be
g of x minus g of c
x minus c when
x does not equal c
and g prime of c
when x equals c
okay
now
essentially what
okay
so
what do we what do we have here
then if i look at f of y
minus f of d
this is equal to u of y
times y minus d always right
because
if y does not equal d
then i divide over and i get u of y
then i get f of y minus f of d on the
left hand side over y minus d and that's
equal to u of y by definition and then
when y equals d i get 0 here and i get 0
over here so that's that's clear
and also
the same here g of x minus g of c equals
v of x minus something times x minus c
okay
all right so we have these two um
expressions
and one more thing i want to note is
that u and v are continuous at y equals
d and x equals c um
respectively
so note that
[Applause]
v of y
is
continuous at
d
and v of
x is
continuous at c
so
let's look at the proof of that we just
need to show that the limit as y
goes to d of v of y equals v of d so
compute the limit as y goes to d
of v of y
now when we look at limits remember
we never
we're not allowed to put y equals d
in the expression for this limit okay
we're always looking at points y close
to d but not equal to d is what i'm what
i'm saying and so therefore when y is
near d
and not equal to d v of y is given by
uh
i should this is
should have written u here sorry u
okay
okay so
we're looking at y near d
but not equal to d and therefore it's
given by this expression right so this
is the limit as y goes to d
of f of y minus f of d
over y minus d
and this is just the definition of the
derivative of f at d
so remember d is g of c so f is
differentiable there and this is uh
by definition u of d
right so this function u is continuous
at
uh y equals d
um
and similarly
the limit as x goes to c of u of x v of
x
equals v of c
equal which is
g prime of c
okay so now we're going to combine um
what i've written here
to finish the proof so
then h of x
minus h of c
this is equal to f of g of x
minus f of
g of c
and this is equal to uh
u of g of x
times
g of x minus g of c
this is from this relation here
so call this one star
this one double star
so this is by star
and now i use uh
the second relation double star to write
g of x minus g of c equals
b of x times
x minus c
and therefore
the limit as x goes to c
of um
h of x
minus um
h of c
over x minus c this is equal to the
limit
as x goes to c
of u of g of x
times v
of x
now
u is continuous at g of c g is
continuous at c
and we prove that the composition of two
continuous functions is continuous
right so
uh
this equals
u of g of c
and v of x we've proven already that
limit is v
of c
and u of g of c you know so this is d
remember in in the notation we had
earlier and therefore that equals
f prime of g of c
remember g of c was d
times
g prime of
c okay
so to go from this point to this point
we use the fact that u is continuous at
c which we proved
um
u is continuous at g of c
which we proved over there and that
g is continuous at c
and therefore the composition of two
continuous functions is continuous at
that point to arrive at uh this guy
okay
but again the whole basic idea was to be
able to write the difference quotient as
kind of a product of
um
you know what looks like the difference
quotient of f
times the difference quotient of g but
you have to be careful because g of x
could equal g of c
in which case you're dividing by zero in
this you know basic idea we had up there
which is not allowed
but you get around it by by
you know using these uh
functions which equal what you want
as long as you're not dividing by zero
basically
okay so that wraps it up for basic
properties
of the derivative
[Applause]
and now we're going to move on to
trying to prove the mean value theorem
the alfred of this
batman tail
um
but first uh in order to prove this
we'll need a result about um the
derivative in relation to
a certain relative minimum and relative
maximum so let me first define what this
means
let s be a subset of r
f be a function from s to r
we say f
has a
relative max
at c
in s
if
there exists a delta positive
such that
for all x and s
x minus e is less than delta
then
f of x is less than or equal to f c
okay
so the picture here and then
let me um
state that there's
analogous definition
of relative min
at c you just take this entire
definition and flip the inequality
okay
that's the definition for relative men
so what this means pictorially so
remember we had this notion of absolute
min and absolute max an absolute max at
a point c
means every other point um at every
other point in s
f of x lies below f of c here we're just
saying as long as you're close to
um
the point c
then you lay below f c so
let's say
let's say our function looks something
like that
okay so then
uh
say we're at this
here so this would be
absolute max because the graph of the
function sits below
the value
of the function at this point for all x
in this uh interval a b okay and then
here at this point
we would have an absolute
min right because
the rest of
because the graph of the function sits
above that point
for all x in this interval but now if
you if i go to this point
say
this would be a relative
max
okay because why if i look at um
you know an interval small interval
around it
and i look inside this interval there's
too many dashed lines going on so i'm
going to
erase this
yeah i'm just going to do away with the
dash
if i zoom in on just this one piece of
the graph then at this point
the graph sits below this point
inside this um
inside this little vertical strip okay
so this guy would be a relative max and
then similarly
at this point here maybe it's uh let me
so you can
really see what
graph is
should have brought different colors
um
at this point
we have relative min
right because nearby
nearby points sit above the value of the
function
evaluated at this point okay so
relative max means nearby points
f sits below that f f evaluated at that
point and relative min is the other way
around
okay
so i don't think we need to
belabor the point of what relative men
relative maxes are i think that's pretty
clear
okay so the theorem
is the following
if f from a b
has a
relative
min or
max
at a point c
strictly inside this closed interval in
the open interval a b
then and
f is
differentiable at c
then
f prime of c equals zero right and this
is kind of clear from this picture
although this kind of might look more
like a sawtooth but it shouldn't that
the tangent at this point is uh
horizontal and the tangent at this point
is horizontal which just
is the expression that
um was just expressing that f prime of c
equals zero right so f prime of c is
supposed to be the slope of the tangent
okay
so the idea of the proof is
and we'll do it for relative max
relative min you get by taking minus f
so we'll do it for
suppose f has a relative max at
c and a b
okay
um
so i'm just going to draw a picture um
to
illustrate why this is the case so
why what i'm about to say is the case so
we have a b
we have c
then
there exists
delta positive
um
say delta 1
such that
two things are true
x or c minus
delta 1
c plus delta 1 is contained in
a b
two
for all x and c minus delta one
c plus delta one
um
f of x is less than or equal to f c
okay so
you know
delta one is chosen as the minimum of uh
so maybe let me not call it delta let me
one let me just call it delta
so
um
first off you know that a b
open interval this is a an open set
which we've encountered in the
assignments
so um
you can find a delta
so that
delta 0 say so that this interval
centered at c is contained in a b
right
now since
f has a relative maximum at this point
there exists another delta one say so
that if
um
i'm inside that interval
then f of x is less than or equal to f c
for all x in that interval
okay and i choose delta to be the
minimum of these two uh these two deltas
and then i will have
um
a chosen delta so that
x that c minus delta c plus delta is
so here
this one is
and then delta 0 is chosen so that that
is contained so i choose the minimum of
these deltas and this is the delta i
take for for this statement
okay
all right
so um
now the way we get that the derivative
is zero is we're going to approach uh c
from
above and
from below
and use the um
the fact that we have a relative max to
show that the derivative is both
uh bigger than or equal to zero and less
than or equal to zero all right so
let x in be um
c minus
um how did i write this
delta over 2n which is
in the
interval c minus delta c
for all n
then what do we know x in
the limit as n goes to infinity of c
minus delta over two
n converges to
c
so
the
derivative at c
is equal to the limit
as n goes to infinity of
f of x sub n minus f of c
over x sub n minus c
now
um
what do we note
so x sub n is in this interval here
which is contained in this interval here
and therefore f of x sub n is always
less than or equal to f of c
so
what's on top is always less than or
equal to zero
okay
now x sub n is always less than c
so this thing on bottom is also less
than zero
and therefore something that's less than
or equal to zero on top over something
that's less than zero on bottom
must be bigger than or equal to zero
so that's approaching c from the left if
we approach c from the right
delta over 2 n which is contained in
c c plus delta
for all n
then
x n converges to c
and
if we look at f prime of c
again this is equal to
limit as n goes to infinity of f of
y sub n minus f of c
over y sub n minus c again
uh f c is a relative maximum so this
thing on top is still less than or equal
to zero
and the thing on bottom though is now
since y sub n is bigger than c
this is positive so something on top is
negative something on top is positive so
the limit must be negative
okay
so we've just shown f prime of c is both
bigger than or equal to zero and that
it's also less than or equal to zero
and therefore the derivative is zero
at this point
okay
and again the proof for a relative
minimum is is um
you know
very similar except um
except that inequality flips signs
and therefore you would get this is less
than or equal to zero this one would be
bigger than or equal to zero
but you still get uh f prime of c is
bounded between zero and zero
okay
so
at a point
where we have a relative minimum
[Applause]
strictly inside the interval
um
the derivative must be zero okay
and the fact that it happens strictly
inside the interval is important right
this is not necessarily um
true if the relative max or relative min
happens at an endpoint right think of f
of x
equals x on zero one right
and it has a absolute minimum at zero
absolute maximum at one and the
derivative is one at both points
not zero so this is only for relative
min
relative maxes that occur inside
strictly inside the interval that the
function's
defined on and
where it's differentiable
okay so now um
we have rolls theorem which is
essentially the mean value theorem um
rotated
we'll get the mean value theorem from
rolle's theorem and which states the
following
f b from a b to r
b continuous
so it's continuous at every point in a b
differentiable
at
every point inside of a b
okay it could be differentiable at the
end point so it's fine but it has to be
differentiable
on the open interval a b
of f b a equals f of b equals 0.
then
there exists a point c
the open interval a b
this is important
such that
f prime of c equals 0.
all right and what's the
what's the picture that goes with this
i'm sure you've seen it before
let me draw a function
that looks kind of like sine or cosine
but anyways
function which is 0 here zero here then
there has to exist a
point where the tangent
is vertical
in fact here
can occur at two different points all
right
but something that's already kind of
giving the game away as far as how we'll
prove this is
um
let's look at where the function
takes a maximum
and a minimum okay
um
you know that that is the the heart of
the proof
and why can we why does it even have an
absolute maximum or absolute minimum
um
so i guess i didn't say this over there
when i discussed relative min and
relative max but an absolute maximum is
also a relative maximum
and
absolute minimum is also a relative
minimum
so
let me make this this is kind of a late
remark
uh
absolute max
is and
is a
relative max
absolute men's
is a relative mint
okay
all right so um this picture's kind of
giving the game away already uh let's
look at where the function takes a max
and a min
and
why can why does f take a max or a min
it's because f is continuous on this
closing bounded interval this is
something we
proved when we were discussing
continuity the min max theorem
so
let's uh let's give the
proof um
since f is continuous
on a b
f
achieves a
relative
max
at
some point c1
and a b
and
relative min
at
c2
and a b
okay
if there exists a x
well so
if of f of c one is positive
then what can you say
well c1 cannot be one of the endpoints
because at the endpoints
f of a equals f of b equals zero right
this implies c one
is in the open interval a b
which implies by the previous theorem
f prime of c1
equals zero
so here you
c equals c1
if i'm at the minimum now
and this is less than zero
then again
this implies that uh
c2 is in the open interval a b
which implies since uh
f has a
minimum at c two
f prime of c two equals zero by the
previous theorem and therefore we could
take c equals c2
all right
if
now this is two cases f of c one
if either f c one is positive or f c 2
is less than 0 then
we have
the result
if f of
c 1 is less than or equal to 0 is less
than or equal to f c
now remember
f achieves a max at c1
f achieves a min at c2
and therefore this should always be less
than or equal to this
if uh the max and the min
so first off um
and make sure i'm getting my logic
correct here
okay so rather than state it this way
let's let's do it like uh
let's let's
do it like this
so in terms of the picture here
this would be c1
c2 where we achieve a max and a min
okay then
in the final case that
f of c1
and
then so this is the max
0 is equal to
f evaluated at a
point then
all right so let me go back to
what i was going to say a minute ago so
in the last case that
f of c one is less than or equal to zero
is less than f of c
now remember this is
the min
this is
the max of f right
so this should always sit
above
f of c2 so that implies
that f of c1 equals
f of c2
and therefore the max and men equal each
other
right
which implies um
for all x and a b
since f of c one is uh
uh the minimum
or f of c two is uh
so i started off with something here
there and in between which implies
for all x and a b
f of x equals f of c two
so that means f is constant right
and we know what the derivative of a
constant function is it's just 0.
so we could take
say the midpoint
and that's the end
okay sorry so that i kind of fumbled
through that uh
for a minute but um
okay
so for any function which is zero at uh
um the endpoints there has to be a point
in between where
um
the function is
the derivative of the function equals
zero now
you know
again we should come back to
um
you know when we see a theorem we should
kind of pick it apart a little bit to
see what's necessary what's not
um
you know
we had these two hypotheses coming in
that the function is continuous and
differentiable on this uh open interval
a b
um
are these uh necessary so
right
so
for example let's say i have um
the function
if i look at the function um
1 minus the absolute value of x
so at -1 1
1.
this is a continuous function on
minus one one
[Applause]
and f of minus one equals f of one
equals zero but there is no point where
f prime of c equals 0. what hypothesis
did i leave out for this function the
fact that it's dif the hypothesis that
it's differentiable at every point in
between right this function's not
differentiable uh
um
but there's no point where the
derivative equals zero right so this
example um you know tells you that the
hypothesis that the function is
um
[Music]
you know differentiable on
uh
the interval minus one one or a b is
necessary for the theorem to be true
okay that's what i'm getting at
okay
now
you know the other hypothesis that the
function is continuous on the closed
interval
is also necessary
let's say i look at
and this is this is pretty easy to come
up with a counter example if i don't
assume that
let's take
let's take the function which is
the function that's x minus 1 for x not
equal to -1 and 0
for x equal to -1 so what does this
function look like
so this function here
is
differentiable on
minus 1 1
f of minus 1 equals f of 1
equals 0.
but again there's no point
c
n minus 1 1
so that
f prime of c equals 0
okay
because the derivative in between uh
minus 1 1 is just 1.
all right so
both of these hypotheses
that f is continuous on the closed
interval and differentiable on the open
interval
are necessary for this theorem to be
true
if you drop either of those hypotheses
then the theorem is false
[Applause]
all right so let's rotate this picture
here and arrive at the mean value
theorem
add f from a b to r
b
continuous so it's continuous on the
closed interval a b
differentiable
on a b
then there exists a c
in the open interval a b
such that
f prime of c
write it this way
f of b minus f of a
times b minus a
okay
so why do i refer to it as a kind of
rotated picture of uh
and shifted kind of version of rolle's
theorem
so there's a b
there's uh
f of a f b
and
let's say that's uh how the function
looks now
the slope of the line
connecting f of b to f of a is exactly f
of b minus f of a
okay so the slope of that line
is f of b minus f of a
and what we're stating is that there's a
point
c so that the tangent
at that point is parallel to that line
okay has the same slope as the line
connecting
f of b
to f of a
okay
so
this stem really does reduce to rolls
theorem
so
let me define a function g from a b to r
which satisfies the the hypotheses of
rolle's theorem
and will give us what we want basically
so g of x
equals f of x
minus f of b
plus
f of b minus f of a
over b minus a
times
b minus x
okay
basically what this function g does is
it takes
uh the function now
and rotates it and shifts it down so
that f
kind of these two points then coincide
and give you 0.
all right
then
g
is
continuous
on the closed interval a b
why because it's a sum of two continuous
functions on a b f of x is continuous on
a b on a b and this is just a constant
that's just a constant this is a
polynomial
so g is continuous on bait on a b
and
differentiable on
a b again because f is right f is
differentiable on the open interval a b
uh this part is differentiable
everywhere so
the sum of two differentiable functions
is differentiable so g of x is
differentiable on a b
so
continuous on a b and differentiable on
a b
and since i said we're going to use
rolls theorem let's compute g of a this
is equal to
f of a minus f of b
plus
f of b minus f of a
over b minus a
times b minus a that cancels with that
minus f of b cancels with f of b
f of a cancels with minus f of a and we
get 0.
then g of b
this is even easier to see if i just
stick this in this is f of b
minus f of b
plus
f of b
minus f of a
over b minus a b minus b
and this also equals zero okay so g of a
and g of b are zero it's the function is
continuous on the closed interval it's
differentiable on the open interval and
therefore by rolls theorem i think
they're supposed to be some sort of
accent over o but i can't
i can't remember and i've forgotten it
already um
by roll's theorem there exists
point c and a b
such that
is equal to
g prime of c which is equal to
we take g and actually compute what the
derivative is at
uh
c is equal to f prime of c
that's a constant derivative of that is
0.
this times this the derivative of x
evaluated at c just gives me minus
f of b minus f of a
times
b minus a
and that's it
0 is equal to f prime of f prime of c
minus what we want we move that to the
other side multiply through by b minus a
and we're done
okay
so
first
very nice applications of the mean value
theorem which i think you learned from
calculus
are the following
[Applause]
let f from i to r b differentiable
meaning it's differentiable at every
point
in the interval i
then we have two conclusions
f is increasing
meaning let me uh
recall what that means for f to be
increasing that means that if x is
less than y
this implies
f of x is less than or equal to f of y
this is equivalent to
for all x and i
f prime of x is bigger than or equal to
zero so remember f is f prime is the
rate of change if the rate of change is
always non-negative then f has to be
growing
so this says
f is decreasing
meaning x
less than y implies
f of x is bigger than or equal to f of y
this is equivalent to
since a function is increasing if and
only if minus f is decreasing this
inequality should flip
okay
so i'm going to do
increasing decreasing follows from
number one by taking minus f okay
okay
so
um
how much time do i have okay i still
have time
so suppose first that
f prime of x is always non-negative
let
a b
be in
i
ah
excuse me
we now want to show f of a is less than
or equal to f of b
then f
[Applause]
is continuous on this smaller interval a
b why because f is differentiable at
every point in i and therefore it is
um
continuous at every point and i so in
particular on this smaller interval
and differentiable
on a b which implies
there exists a c
in a b
so by the mean value theorem
such that f of b
minus f of a
equals f prime of c
times b minus a and now since the
derivative is always non-negative and b
minus a is positive this is bigger than
or equal to zero
i.e
f of b minus f of a is bigger than or
equal to zero
okay
so we've proven one direction we've
proven that
if you like
um
that
the function's derivative being
non-negative implies that the function
is increasing
so now let's prove the opposite
direction
so
suppose f is increasing
and c is an i
let x in be a sequence
and i
such that
xn converges to c
and
one of two things holds
and either
[Applause]
say a
for all n x n is less than c or b
for all n x n is bigger than c now we
can always find such a sequence given a
point c and the interval i so
um
you know if we're
if i
so let's say
let's say it's a closed interval
and c is in
here then we can find a sequence x n
converging to c
you know approaching c from the left
yeah
if c is one of the endpoints then we can
find a sequence from i approaching c
from the right that's b
right and the same thing if c is over
here we can find a sequence approaching
c
strictly from the left
okay
so there always exists
such a sequence
always exist
and this is because
i is an interval
okay
and
if the sequence satisfies uh case a
and we look at f prime then uh
we get that f of
x n is less than or equal to f of c
for all n
and let me in fact write this a little
bit differently
since so here we're using that f is
increasing
since f is increasing
which implies for all n
f of x n minus f of
c
over x sub n
minus c
now
this thing on top is negative x n uh is
less than c
so this thing on the bottom is also
negative
and therefore this thing is
positive not negative i mean
therefore the limit must also be
non-negative
but that limit is just the derivative
evaluated at c
okay
and case b is kind of similar
i mean not kind of it is
in case b
we get that
for all n
f of x n now since x ends to the right
of c
um
let me write it this way
this minus f of c is bigger than or
equal to 0
which implies that
f prime of c which is the limit as n
goes to infinity of f of
x n minus
f of c over x n minus c
what's on top is non-negative and what's
on bottom is non-negative because x n is
bigger than c
so
bigger than zero bigger than zero
bigger than 0.
so in either k that's so
thus in either case we get that f prime
of c is bigger than or equal to 0.
all right
and therefore we've proven that the
derivative is always non-negative
so that's uh
one and two
f is
decreasing
if and only if the function minus f
is increasing which by what we've done
from part one
is if and only if minus f prime of x
is bigger than or equal to zero for all
x
and i
and then multiplying through by minus
by this
minus one
gives me number two
all right
and so
let me make one last uh
i know it's tabuta right on the back uh
part but i'm gonna do it anyways
we have the very simple theorem which
now follow follows
let f from ida r
be
differentiable
then
f is constant
so f of
x equals f of y for all x and y and i
if and only if
the derivative is identically zero
okay
so
um
is constant if and only if
f is
both increasing
and decreasing
right
because it satisfies the equality sign
in both of those
and by what we've done
now for all this means for all x and i
f prime of x is bigger than or equal to
zero and
that's for the increasing part f prime
of x is less than or equal to zero
and therefore
f prime of x uh this is equivalent to f
prime of x equals zero
all right
okay so we'll stop there